
\chapter{Licenses and Copyrights}

The LBJ compiler and library are covered by the University of Illinois Open
Source License.  The LBJ compiler contains code generated by the JLex
automatic scanner generator and the Java CUP automatic parser generator, and
it is packaged with run-time classes from the CUP distribution.

\section{LBJ's License}

\noindent
Illinois Open Source License \\
University of Illinois/NCSA \\
Open Source License \\

\noindent
Copyright \copyright~2007, Nicholas D. Rizzolo and Dan Roth.  All rights
reserved. \\

\noindent
Developed by: \\
   The Cognitive Computations Group \\
   Department of Computer Science \\
   University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign \\
   http://l2r.cs.uiuc.edu/$\sim$cogcomp \\

\noindent
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy
of this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal
with the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights
to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell
copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

\begin{itemize}
\item Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice,
      this list of conditions and the following disclaimers.
\item Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright
      notice, this list of conditions and the following disclaimers in the
      documentation and/or other materials provided with the distribution.
\item Neither the names of the Cognitive Computations Group, nor the
      University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, nor the names of its
      contributors may be used to endorse or promote products derived from
      this Software without specific prior written permission.
\end{itemize}

\noindent
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
CONTRIBUTORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM,
OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS WITH
THE SOFTWARE.

\section{JLex's License}

Copyright 1996-2003 by Elliot Joel Berk and C. Scott Ananian \\

\noindent
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that
the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both the copyright
notice and this permission notice and warranty disclaimer appear in supporting
documentation, and that the name of the authors or their employers not be used
in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software without
specific, written prior permission. \\

\noindent
The authors and their employers disclaim all warranties with regard to this
software, including all implied warranties of merchantability and fitness.  In
no event shall the authors or their employers be liable for any special,
indirect or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever resulting from
loss of use, data or profits, whether in an action of contract, negligence or
other tortious action, arising out of or in connection with the use or
performance of this software. \\

\noindent
This is an open source license.  It is also GPL-Compatible (see entry for
"Standard ML of New Jersey").  The portions of JLex output which are
hard-coded into the JLex source code are (naturally) covered by this same
license. \\

\noindent
Java is a trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc.  References to the Java
programming language in relation to JLex are not meant to imply that Sun
endorses this product.

\section{CUP's License}

CUP Parser Generator Copyright Notice, License, and Disclaimer \\
Copyright 1996-1999 by Scott Hudson, Frank Flannery, C. Scott Ananian \\

\noindent
Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this software and its
documentation for any purpose and without fee is hereby granted, provided that
the above copyright notice appear in all copies and that both the copyright
notice and this permission notice and warranty disclaimer appear in supporting
documentation, and that the names of the authors or their employers not be
used in advertising or publicity pertaining to distribution of the software
without specific, written prior permission. \\

\noindent
The authors and their employers disclaim all warranties with regard to this
software, including all implied warranties of merchantability and fitness.  In
no event shall the authors or their employers be liable for any special,
indirect or consequential damages or any damages whatsoever resulting from
loss of use, data or profits, whether in an action of contract, negligence or
other tortious action, arising out of or in connection with the use or
performance of this software. \\

\noindent
This is an open source license.  It is also GPL-Compatible (see entry for
"Standard ML of New Jersey").  The portions of CUP output which are hard-coded
into the CUP source code are (naturally) covered by this same license, as is
the CUP runtime code linked with the generated parser. \\

\noindent
Java is a trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc.  References to the Java
programming language in relation to CUP are not meant to imply that Sun
endorses this product. 

